Unemployment is an important topic, it raises a lot of questions, in fact, if you look at the past papers, you will see that unemployment is a topic that raises a lot of questions from other topics. Now, what is unemployment? Now, what is unemployment? First, we have to understand what unemployment is. We have to establish a misconception to correct it. It is believed that every person who is unemployed is unemployed, actually that's not true. If someone is employed or unemployed, it depends on whether he is a laborer or not. And what is the quality of being a laborer or not? Is he willing and able to work or not? So, who is unemployed? This is a laborer out of job. There is a laborer who does not have a job. Who is a laborer? A laborer is someone who is willing and able to work. If a person is not willing or able, then we cannot consider him to be a laborer. So, what is unemployment? Unemployment is that someone is not able to find a job who is actively seeking a job. So, unemployed worker is one who is willing and able to work, actively seeking work, Actually, actively seeking work and willing and able to work have the same meaning. I am just showing that it can be taken in two ways. But, out of job. But, does not currently have employment. So, all those people who are looking for a job, it is not necessary that they do not have employment. It is possible that someone has employment but he is looking for a better opportunity. So, we will not call him unemployed. Everyone who is seeking work is not necessarily unemployed. Anyone who is seeking work who is out of job will be considered as unemployed. The basic requirement for unemployment is that you have to be a laborer first. If you can work and you do not have a job, then you will be unemployed. Otherwise, you cannot be included in the category of employed or unemployed. To understand this better, look at this. Assume that I am doing a non-technical analysis. That this box, for example, represents a country's population. Now, first of all, I will divide this box into three parts. I am not making it according to age. I am measuring the age here. Let us say this is 16 and this is 60. I have chosen 16 and 60 as per my convenience. This can be anything that the country establishes. The age at which I am putting a limit is called the school-leaving age. School-leaving age has nothing to do with going to school or not. School-leaving age is the minimum age after which you can work legally. This is the minimum age after which a person can legally enter full employment. By full employment, I mean, generally according to the laws of the countries, full employment means somewhere between 40 and 44 hours per week if you work. So, this is full-time employment. If there is a rule in a country that after the age of 16 or 15, you can do part-time employment, which is to say 10 hours, 15 hours or 18 hours per week, then it is part-time employment. Full-time employment can only be done when you cross the school-leaving age. 60 is not necessary for every country. I am just giving an example. This is your retirement age. This question is often asked about the retirement age. If someone is working even after the retirement age, then it is okay. If someone is working after the retirement age, then it means he is taking an extension after retirement. Actually, retirement age is not the age at which you will say that you are not allowed to work. Retirement age is the age at which retirement and its benefits can be claimed. This is the age at which you can claim retirement and its benefits. Suppose a country has set a retirement age of 60. If someone wants to work even after 60, then he can work with an extension. There is a concept called post-retirement. If a person is 60 and he still wants to work, but the firm says no, this is post-retirement, you cannot work beyond this. This is absolutely possible. This possibility also exists. And this possibility also exists that he should be made an extension of 1 year, 2 years, 3 years. It depends on the labor laws of the country. This means that the age of 16 to 60 is more than the school-leaving age and less than the retirement age. This is called the working age of the country. And everyone who is below 16 or below school-leaving age is below school-leaving age. And all of them who are above 60 are all above retirement age. All the labor will come from the working age population. The population you have in the middle is the working age population of the country. All the labor of the country will come from this working age population. This is your working age population. But it is not that everyone in the working age population will be ready to work. It is not necessary that everyone in the working age population will be ready to work. That is why we will put some limits in this. We will do some elimination in this. First of all, I will separate a category in this. Those people who are voluntarily non-participating. These are the people who do not want to work. For example, housewives or students who are completing their education. Although they have crossed 16, they can legally work. But they say that they do not want to work. They want to study full-time. Or drug addicts, for example. Generally, if they do not want to work, they will come under this category. Then I will add another category from this. Those people who are legally restricted. Now these might be people who are willing to work and able to work. But they are restricted by some kind of legal requirement. For example, there are prisoners. Prisoners are willing and able to work. They are of the right age. But you have incarcerated them. And you have terminated their right to work. Now, as long as they are prisoners, they cannot work. For example, there are people in the country who do not have a work permit. They are not allowed to work. So, they will come under this category. While there can be another category. Those people who are residually restricted. Residually restricted means those people who are physically and mentally challenged. We have also terminated them. Now, the people who have survived. We can make another category. But the rest of the people who have survived. They are your labor force. These are the people who can work in your country. Who are willing to work and able to work. And who can come under this? There can be people who are employed. There can be people who are self-employed. Employed and self-employed are usually kept in the same category. But self-employed means those who have employed themselves. While in this category, there can be unemployed people. Unemployed people can also come under this category. Because they are a part of the labor force. They do not have a job, but they are still in the labor force. Now, think about the entire population. We first terminated them. Those who are below school age. Then we terminated them. We also terminated them. What is left is the working age population. And from this working age population, those who are not ready to work. Or even in this age group, they do not have the right to work. We terminated them. So, what is left is the country's labor force. These are the people who will be called labor in your country. These are the people who can work in your country. Some of these people will be employed or self-employed. And some will be unemployed. That is why unemployment is measured. Unemployment is measured by the unemployment rate. Unemployment rate is the number of unemployed divided by the labor force times 100. Now, notice that we did not divide the unemployment rate by the population. If I had divided it by the population, then I would have divided it by all these people. I did not divide it by the working age population. Because if I had divided it by the working age population, then I would have divided it by all these people. I have seen unemployment only from this portion. These are the people who are labor. These are the people who can be employed. These are the people who can be put in the unemployed category. Unemployment is not taken as a proportion of the population. Unemployment is taken as a proportion of the labor force. The proportion of people who are out of work is called unemployed. It is not seen from the whole population. If I start dividing it by the population, then what will happen? Every child who is born will be unemployed. This is not a proper analysis. There is a person who is in the old age and is not able to work. There is a mental challenge. We will also say that he is unemployed. This is not possible. Unemployment is taken as a proportion of the labor force. By definition, the labor force is a pool of all individuals in a country that are willing and able to work. Who is willing and able to work? It is the labor force. The labor force tells how many people in the country are willing and able to work. It includes both self-employed and unemployed. The unemployment rate that we have calculated shows the number of unemployed as a proportion of labor force. We are not looking at the unemployment rate as a proportion of the entire population. We are looking at the unemployment rate as a proportion of the labor force. What is the proportion of those who are willing to work and those who are able to work? That is the unemployment rate. As you can see, we are multiplying the percentage by 100. If the unemployment rate is 5%, that does not tell you that 5% of the entire population that is 5% of those people who are willing to work and able to work, is 5% of the unemployed. How do we further categorize this? The types of unemployment and the causes of unemployment. The types of unemployment and the causes of unemployment can be divided into two parts. Unemployment can be a form of equilibrium unemployment. Unemployment can be disequilibrium unemployment. Equilibrium unemployment and disequilibrium unemployment. Equilibrium unemployment is always present in economy. There is an unemployment which is always present in economy. It is also known as natural unemployment. This unemployment is natural for the economy. Disequilibrium unemployment is below full employment. The major cause of disequilibrium unemployment is cyclical unemployment. Equilibrium unemployment has two main causes. Frictional unemployment and Structural unemployment. We will discuss about Frictional, Structural and Cyclical later. First, we will discuss about equilibrium unemployment and disequilibrium unemployment. To understand this, let us first establish the equilibrium in economy. We have already seen the equilibrium in economy. Price level GDP This is the aggregate supply curve of economy. The vertical part of aggregate supply curve is the place where economy goes to full employment. We know that this is a case of full employment. Where does economy goes to full employment? This is YFE. YFE means full employment level of output. This is for example the economy's aggregate demand curve. This is equilibrium. First, let us remove this misunderstanding that if economy is at equilibrium then unemployment will also be at equilibrium. That is not true. Equilibrium unemployment exists at full employment. That is why we are saying it is always present in the economy. Actually, let me put it in a very simple way. The unemployment at YFE can be rectified by itself. How can it be rectified? By reducing wage in economy. If wage is reduced, firms will think that they can employ more workers. There are some unemployment in a country which cannot be rectified by reducing wage. This becomes natural because economy does not have the ability to eliminate this unemployment. Keep this in mind about equilibrium. Equilibrium is the stage from which there is no tendency to change. If so many people are sitting idle in economy, they will say that they are ready to work even at low wage. You can see a tendency to change. If economy is at full employment and all resources are engaged some workers are idle because there is no demand for their work. These people cannot be employed by adjusting the economy. There is no place for them unless new industries are set up or these workers prepare themselves for some other work. Economy cannot make a place for them. That is why this kind of unemployment is called equilibrium unemployment. Economy cannot accommodate them by itself. This equilibrium unemployment can be corrected through an adjustment in wages. What is the difference between equilibrium unemployment and disequilibrium unemployment? Equilibrium unemployment is which can be corrected to adjustments in economy adjustments in wages. This can be very good even if you do not have a policy. Equilibrium unemployment is which cannot be eliminated eliminated through adjustments in economy through adjustments. We cannot adjust the economy by ourselves. We need to bring some structural change or we need to create new institutions or we need to change the workers. If we do something like this, this problem will be solved. This will always be in the economy and when the economy cannot adjust when there is surplus, price decreases when there is a shortage, price increases they are adjusting by themselves. If there is disequilibrium, adjustments can be made. But if there is a problem in equilibrium, then there will be no further adjustments. Then we will say that this is equilibrium because there will be no further adjustments. The next step is that we will see frictional, structural and cyclical in detail. Thank you.
